# GGOR modeling project

GGOR stands for "Gewenst Grond- en Oppervlaktewater Regiem", translated: desired ground and surface water regime. It models simultaneously the average groundwater head and water balance of a large set of agricultural parcels under varying precipitation, evaporation, ditch level variation and seepage from a lower regional aquifer. In the lower third of the Netherlands, namely the west, ground surface elevation is generally low and more often than not below mean sea level.
The subsuface generally consists of a shallow Holocene top layer with with moderate to low conductivity and a thin high-resistance layer at its bottom ((compressed) basal peat) below which a large scale regional sandy aquifer from the Pleistocene is present.

 To allow agriculture, the land is subdivided in so-called polders, i.a. regions surrounded by dikes and intersected by a large grid of smaller and large ditches in which the water levels are artificially maintained by a pump work lifting surplus rain and seepage water into higher regional canals from which it is finally pumped to the sea. The ditches divide a polder in a large number of individual agricultural parcels, generally in the order of 100 m wide and several hundreds of meters long. The groundwater level in each of the polders varies over time due to precipitation, evaporation and surface (ditch) level fluctuations in accordance the size of the parcel, possible tile or sub-ditch drainage, regional seepage, surface runoff and the hydraulic properties of the subsurface and the entry- and exit resistance between parcel and dich.

 Each parcel is hydrologically modelled as a two layer system, consisting of a shallow top layer (the cover layer, with a moderate horizontal and a low vertical conductivity) on top of a deep sandy aquifer.
 Since each polder or region hold many hundreds to thousands of parcels, each separated by ditches from its neighbors, it is virtually impossible to implement all of them in one big regional groundwater model detailed enough to see what happens within each of them. Therefore, a compromise was necessary to achieve simultaneous modeling of all parcels with adequate detail to obtain a comprehensive and sufficiently adequate behavior of the groundwater in each of them.

 The GGOR model in this project models all parcels simultaneously be considering only a cross section of each of them, perpendicular to the long axis of the parcel. This way, each parcel can be represented with a single row in a structured Modflow grid. Thousands of parcels simply implies a regular modflow grid with thousands of rows, which are kept separate from each other by using a zero hydraulic conductivity along all columns. Clearly, different parcels have different widths. Therefore, the widest parcel determines the width of the model grid. When a column width size is chosen, this then also determines the number of columns of the Modflow grid.

 The next compromise is that each parcel is considered symmetrical perpendicular to its center long axis. This implies that only half of the parcel width needs to be included in the model and we need only one ditch per parcel.

 In the model, this ditch is simulated by a combination of the general head boundary (GHB) and the river boundary (RIV) both connected to the left most cell in each row. The RIV boundary is set such that it only contributes when the ditch is lower than the head in the first cell. This implies that with both GHB and RIV packages implemented, the ditch-ground resistance will be lower when water exits from the parcel into the ditch than when infiltrating from the ditch into the ground, which is conform reality.
 To implement parcels with smaller widths, some cells towards the right side of the grid are made inactive according to the width of each parcel. Choosing a sufficiently low column width, e.g. 1 m, sufficient detail is obtained for an adequate simulation of the groundwater behavior in each parcel, i.e. in each separate model row.

 Precipitation and evapotranspiration are modeled in the standard Modflow way, using the SURF and EXPD planes to vary evapotranspiration with depth of the actual groundwater level.
 Surface runoff, tile drainage and sub-ditch drainage is modelled by mean of the DRN package. When tile drains are present, drains are laid on the level of these field drains. When sub-ditches are present, the drain elevation is locally lowered to represent them. Without any drains or sub-ditches, drains are placed at ground elevation to capture surface runoff.

 With these tools in place, we can simulate thousands of parcels (their cross sections) simultaneously in large detail in both space and time. Modflow will provide the head in every column and every time step, while it also gives the cell-by-cell water budget for every cell and time step.

 The outcomes are evaluated in terms of parcel-averages head and parcel budget component over each parcel for every time step. The latter allows showing the running water budget graphically over any subset of parcels or all parcels together, expressed in mm/d. The heads allow to make a regional map of the heads in the parcels for every time-step or show the running head for one or more parcels (average heads over a large number of parcels is not really useful). The obtained time series for each parcel can be used to compute the mean lowest (GLG), mean highest (GHG) and mean spring (GVG) groundwater level for each parcel. This is done over a set of 8 hydrological years (1 April - 31 March), by taking the the three highest, three lowest and threes spring water levels of each of the 8 hydrological years from the set of heads registered or computed on every 14th and 28th of each month for GHG and GLG, and of 14/3, 28/3 and 14/4 for the GVG. (Note that this implies that the 14/3 and 28/3 are the last two values of the previous hydrological year).

 Finally the GLG, GHG and GVG are used for policy decisions as they are considered to determine the behavior or crop and natural species. When the computed values do not match with the desired values in part of the area, the water authorities may decide to adapt their surface water system and regime.

 The GGOR model is implemented using Flopy with Modflow 6 (mf6) with a structured grid (i.e. consisting of layers, rows and columns) like in previous Modflow versions.

 The GGOR can also be run using analytical formulas for the cross sections instead of using Modflow. This makes for a compacter system that can be implemented relatively easily in a GIS. However, analytical solutions cannot readily implement the various processes that a numerical model can handle. More over transient groundwater models that include seepage with water levels varying along the cross section do not exist. Therefore, the analytical formulas are steady flow models that are used in a quasi-transient way as documented in the accompanying pdf with the theory. The analytical solutions may also be used to verify the numerical implementation as well as to verify their (lack of) accuracy due to the quasi-transient implemnation. For slow groundwater systems, the difference will be virtually none, but for fast systems, it may be substantial. However, because the water budget is maintained in both the numerical and the analytical models, the differences do not accumulate during the simulation.

 The GGOR modeling project was started in 2012 in Waternet based on an initial spreadsheet implementation Maarten Ouboter, which was implented in GIS by Willem-Jan Voort. He used a one-layer analytical formula with given head below the shallow aquifer. The current model was developed further by Theo Olsthoorn and Jos Beemster both theoretically elaborating more analytical solutions and also numerically in Modflow. The first numerical model was developed using Matlab as a preprocessor for Modflow and has been used for many years within Waternet by Jos Beemster and Stefan Fritz for surface water regime policy analysis in the area by the Water Board "Amstel Gooi en Vecht".

 Jos Beemster unfortunately died 30 August 2022 at the age of 62 due to heart failure after a bicycle tour int he French Alps. This work is therefore, dedicated in his remembrance.

